i'm joined today by professor steve
powers the national medical director of
nhs england and general sir gordon
messenger
the head of operations for the community
testing program
tomorrow night our national restrictions
in england will come to an end
and subject to the vote in parliament
will return
to the tiered system from wednesday
morning
i know that the national restrictions
have been really tough for some people
but the good news is they've been
working
let me take a moment if i may to run
through some of the numbers
today's study from imperial college
shows that the national restrictions
have brought down
cases by a third over the last week
the average number of positive tests is
now 14
778 down from a peak of 25
[Music]
331 on the 16th
of november today there are 15
712 patients in hospital
right across the uk with coronavirus
that is down from 16 000
on the 23rd of november a week ago
in england in the week before the peak
the number of
cases grew by 11 but in the last week
cases have dropped by 30 percent almost
a third this is clearly good news
it shows that the national restrictions
have been successful
and what this means in practice is that
through everyone's
actions in respecting the national
lockdown
and through everything that people have
sacrificed
we've reduced pressures on the nhs we've
brought down the number of coronavirus
cases
we've got this virus back under control
and i want to thank you for that and for
the part that you've played
the effect of the action that we take of
course brings with it huge challenges
too
especially for the hospitality sector
and as the analysis of health economic
and social effects of covert 19 and the
approach to tiering
shows which we've published today
it clearly demonstrates this action
is necessary to avoid a much worse
outcome and we must be vigilant
there are still 14 778
positive cases reported every day and
there are still
those fifteen thousand seven hundred and
twelve people in hospital with covid
and sadly there are still 460 reported
deaths
on average each day this is far too many
but there is light at the end of the
tunnel we know that together we can beat
this
and we've got to stick at it
putting this in technical terms the r
rate is back below one
but only just when r is below one
the number of infections falls over time
because on average each infected person
infects fewer than one other and for
that to happen on average
it's important that lots of infected
people infect no one else at all
this is the central challenge of this
pandemic
and it's made much much more difficult
because about one in three people with
coronavirus
have no symptoms at all but nevertheless
they pass the infection on
to others and that is why even as we
ease these national restrictions
we've got to keep some restrictions in
place
and hence the tiering system so while we
can let up a little
we can't afford to let up a lot
the success of our collective efforts
means that from wednesday
everyone in england even those in tier
three
can have some greater freedoms but we
don't have much headroom
we can't risk letting cases rise again
especially into christmas
and with the flu season round the corner
the prime minister has published the
government's
coveted winter plan which sets out
the international restrictions and the
steps that we'll take
to help to bring life back to normal by
spring
but even as we take those steps forward
we must keep our resolve
we've worked so hard and collectively
sacrificed
so much but we can get through this
and i know that hope is on the horizon
in the past fortnight we've made some
really significant progress
on vaccines and the nhs now stands ready
to deploy a vaccine
should one be approved by the uk's
independent regulator
today moderna the american company
formally filed for its vaccine in
america moderna has already been
submitting data to
the mhra the uk's regulator for some
time
and as we set out this weekend we've
secured two million
further doses meaning that we in the uk
now have access to a total of 357
million doses
of seven different vaccines and while we
keep working
on a vaccine we've already built a huge
testing capacity that we can deploy
right now and i wanted to take a moment
to talk through the next
steps on testing since the start of the
pandemic we've built the biggest testing
capacity
in europe and it means we can use tests
to do lots of things that we couldn't do
before
in addition to our symptomatic testing
program and the rapid testing that we're
now deploying in the nhs and across
social care
we have the capacity to do more today
we begin the rollout of our university
student testing program
and expand community testing and we
won't just test people with
symptoms because of this problem of
asymptomatic transmission people who
don't have symptoms but do have covid
transmitting covert to others
we're going to test people who don't
have symptoms as well
this really matters because finding the
positives
by finding the positives we can break
the chain of transmission and stop
other people catching covet in liverpool
where over 300 000 people both those
with symptoms and those without
where they where that that testing has
happened
they've managed to bring the case rates
down by over three quarters
and so on wednesday liverpool will go
into tier
two not tier three
of course i want to see this sort of
success right across the board
so we're rolling out community testing
much more
widely we've been working with those
going into
tier three with colleagues from scotland
wales and northern ireland too and today
with the publication of our community
testing prospectus
we set out the next phase of that work
to give tier three areas a faster way
out of the toughest restrictions
to support them to come down the tears
as has happened in liverpool
we've already received significant
interest from around the country
including from the west midlands red car
warwickshire
and medway and others and this offer is
available
all across the uk and will be
delivered in partnership with local
authorities
in tier three areas and with devolved
administrations
throughout the country because by using
tests that can turn results
around in under 30 minutes we can and
then isolate
people who have coveted including
crucially
the about one in three people we don't
have those symptoms
at all but can nevertheless pass the
infection on
because if you have covered without
symptoms
and still in effect
others that of course silent danger
you wouldn't know that you're risking
lives around you
so to anybody if you're off
for the test please take it save a life
the final thing i wanted to say is that
it is responsibility
to keep ourselves ourselves safe
to keep our families and our communities
safe that responsibility is on
all of us and i know that it weighs
heavily carrying it for a long time now
but the light of dawn is on the horizon
it's the moment to stand
firm until the morning so we can look
back and see clearly
that everything we gave and everything
we did it was not for nothing
but so lives and build back better for
everyone
and i want to turn to professor powers
to take us through the latest numbers on
the impact
on the nhs thank you so today i'm going
to present
just a single slide it's an update of a
slide that i've shown before
which ovid 19 hospital inpatients in
england
and as you all know as infection rates
rise
so do unfortunately do hospital
admissions for those who are sickest
and of course in a minority of people
also that requires
uh treatment in our intensive care units
and as i've shown you before
as infection rates have risen during the
autumn from september through october
into november
then usually with a couple of weeks lag
we start to see rises in hospital
admissions and the number of people in
hospital
and you can see in this chart that going
through the autumn
into november we have seen increased
numbers of people in our hospitals in
england
now the national lockdown was introduced
at the beginning of november and we
would expect it would be a couple of
weeks as i've said
before we begin to see the effects of
that
on hospitalizations as the secretary of
state has said
we have the evidence that infection
rates are now falling and have been
falling
during this period of lockdown and we
are now just beginning to see that
translate through into hospital
admissions uh which have been falling
and into the overall number of people in
hospital which again
in recent days has started to turn the
corner and is now falling
and as you can see stood in english
hospitals at 13772
yesterday now beneath this there is some
regional variation
in the northeast and the northwest where
infection rates have been falling from a
high
base we have similarly seen early falls
in the number of people in hospital
in the south of the country where
infection rates have been lower but
increasing
we are only just beginning to see some
effects
of the lockdown but it will be the next
week or two as we see those full effects
translate through
but of course what's crucial is that we
see hospital
admissions and hospital patients falling
we're going into winter
the nhs is busiest time we are
continuing
all the elective work that we do and
trying to catch up on the backlog that
was caused by the pandemic
uh over the spring so it's crucial uh
that we don't have so many patients in
our hospitals that we cannot do that
work
and that's why it's important that
numbers continue to fall and of course
that's why it's important that infection
rates fall
so we do need to see the further effects
of the measures that we all have to
follow
and of course everybody in the nhs is
extremely grateful
that the public is complying with those
measures because that is how we can all
support the nhs in its work secretary of
state
thank you very much professor paris the
first question by video is from
ella in southampton ella when the tier
system begins this week what are the
rules regarding social distancing in an
established relationship in a tier two
area
my boyfriend and i are in a long-term
relationship but we live in separate
households
so unsure what rules apply to us can we
see each other indoors are we only
permitted to see each other outdoors
despite being in an established
relationship
thank you very much ella the rules about
exactly what is permitted
in each of the tiers is on the gov dot
uk
website and we're also making sure that
it's widely available through
advertising i start my answer with that
because
for everybody watching if you're in a
specific
situation then the best thing to do is
to go and look precisely
at the rules now of course i understand
the impact on people who are in
a long-term relationship and we have
made specific provision
but the general rule for those who are
in a
uh who are in tier two is that it is
the the rule of six applies outdoors
including for instance in a private
garden but indoors
you should only be mixing with people
who are in your
own household and so i hope that answers
the
question and i would urge you to go and
look
on the government website if you've got
any query
on any of the specific rules in any of
the tiers
in which you live the next question from
adrian in worthing which has been
submitted by uh by text
what provision is there for testing of
all students at universities before they
return home
for christmas well this is a great time
to ask this question
uh adrian because today is the first day
that we're rolling out the widespread
testing of people
who are about to return from university
and we want to make sure that people can
come home from university
but do that in the safest possible way
so there's a program right across
universities
right across the uk to ensure that as
many people as possible
can get a test before they travel
and this is a a really helpful
contribution
an example of how the expansion and
testing capacity that we've
built up over these last um uh nine
months or so
can have a real world impact and then of
course
there are arrangements in place that if
you're at university your university
will be able to give you the details of
for those who test positive who of
course then need to
isolate along with their contacts
but that's uh starting today is there
anything else that you think we should
add
no so thank you agent um that is uh
the uh the provisions there uh we've um
and i hope that all students will engage
with this
enthusiastically because uh it's so
important for making sure that people
can get home
safely at the end of this term next
question
is from hugh pim from the bbc hugh
thank you secretary of state testing for
students is voluntary and is not
available
to every student at every university so
how effective
can that programme be and a question for
steve powis
how worried is the nhs about a new wave
of infections putting real
pressure on the nhs in january following
the relaxation over christmas
uh thanks hugh so our approach to
testing
is uh that it's voluntary we haven't
made testing
mandatory and maybe i'll bring in a
general messenger
on this approach with the community
testing that we're rolling out
as well with the prospectus that's being
is being launched now
um the um of course our goal
is to get this testing made available to
as many students as possible
it is a huge logistical exercise i'm
very grateful to the universities right
across the uk
who've engaged with us to to help to
make this
happen um it is about making things as
safe as possible and anybody who has a
concern about the need to access testing
should in the first instance speak to
their university because we're doing
this in partnership with the with the
universities
i think it will make a good difference a
good positive difference
but as i say we haven't made it
mandatory because that brings in all
sorts of other considerations
and we think that it is therefore best
done on a voluntary basis
um general messenger and then i'll bring
in steve on the second question
so obviously a really important part of
the community testing program is to try
and drive up
participation the higher numbers that we
get
tested then the more effective uh this
regime will be
and and we think that the best way to do
that is to work with the local
communities and the local leaderships
because they're best able to tackle
where needs are where risks are
and they're best able to tailor their
offer to the local communities that they
serve
so that's right at the heart of this
community testing program
is a partnership that's led from the
local level but supported by
central uh help thanks very much and
steve on the second question about the
new year
thank you hugh well as i said when i
introduce the
data slide it really is important for
the nhs
that we get infection rates down and
that translates
as it does into taking pressure off
hospitals
reducing the number of admissions and
reducing the number of people in
hospital
uh with covid19 and that's for a number
of reasons and i'll
say them again firstly unlike the spring
when we were heading out of winter into
the summer
we are now heading into the winter the
nhs is always at its busiest
in january february and into march we
see more
infections chest infections from other
viruses and bugs we see more slips trips
and falls so the pressure on the nhs
builds so it's crucial going into that
period
that we have this under control again
unlike the spring we are continuing as
full-on as we possibly can
with all our routine work our elective
work
and we are trying to make sure that we
catch up unfortunately on the the
backlog that we
that we had because of the pandemic in
the spring and of course we want
we've always been open for everybody
with emergency conditions with symptoms
for heart attacks and strokes
and we need the public to access the nhs
just as they always do
we saw a bit of a drop of that in the
spring we don't want to see that we
we want people to come forward so for
all those reasons it's really critical
that we keep infection rates under
control now clearly
christmas is a special time uh but
the nhs always asks people to be
sensible over christmas
uh and we're confident again that people
will act sensibly once again
over christmas they will use the change
in restrictions
sensibly and we
will go into the new year hopefully with
infection rates staying down and falling
and therefore the pressure
coming off the nhs at that critical time
of year
thanks hugh next question is from emily
morgan at itv emily
thank you secretary of state um i've got
a question about mass testing
i just wonder how you expect to have the
same success you had in liverpool
if you're not going to give the councils
the same
sort of resources coventry council have
told us that they feel like they've
simply been left to try and
work this out themselves and it will
cost them a million pounds will they get
that sort of money to be able to do the
community testing you want them to be
able to do
well yes in the uh prospectus that we're
publishing
right now it includes extra funding for
local authorities to do this testing
up to a figure of 14 pounds per test
done so that's quite significant extra
funding
that's available across the uk for
councils that want to make this work
on the model of liverpool and i'll ask a
general messenger to set out more
details of how we can make it work
because this community testing approach
is so important to
finding the cases that we haven't yet
found
and so reducing the the number of
infections
which obviously is critical for
everybody so first
the um we're trying to move away from
the term mass testing i think this
is about community testing it's about
tailoring it to the needs as i said
of the of of the local area and that
might be
geographically specific or it might be
ethnic community specific
um uh and i i think the perspective the
secretary of state's right when he says
the prospectus which will
be public from now will set out a great
deal
of support uh and a great deal of uh
signposting for what is on
offer uh to these local authorities
and one could easily see an arrangement
where we're setting up some small
local targeted community testing sites
but equally when a community wants to
target broader swathes of the population
something larger something more sort of
ubiquitous
tackling larger swathes of of the
population it really depends on where
the need is
and will be driven by the local
leadership and the local directors
of of public health it's important to
talk about the workforce here i think
because
as you uh rightly point out liverpool
was delivered primarily by
a military workforce uh and that
um and i'm not speaking uh as part of
the ministry of defence i work for the
health secretary on the community
testing program
but i can say with confidence that that
cannot be replicated
around the country and therefore the
military support along with all other
types central support has to be targeted
where it's needed most and where it can
have
the greatest effect so i have absolutely
no doubt that the military will continue
to play a really
important part in the community and
testing program but the baseline
assumption in terms of workforce
generation
is that that will be delivered locally
with considerable support
uh from uh the center and from what i've
seen
of a number of local communities there's
great ingenuity already underway
in delivering that workforce they're
accessing the volunteer force they're
working very innovatively with
uh the private sector and yes of course
they've got good liaison
with uh local uh leadership uh in
the uh the military so that is our
starting uh assumption as i say i have
no doubt that the military
will uh play a prominent role uh but the
idea that it can be a wholesale offer to
all
local authorities is simply
undeliverable given uh
what the military are doing already
thanks very much andy bell from uh
channel five andy
all right secretary of state thank you
very much
um realistically is there any chance of
any part of england being able to move
down a tier this side of christmas
there's meant to be a review in a couple
of weeks time
isn't it much more likely that anyway
we'll have to wait until well into
january
for any chance of moving down the tier
because we'll have to work out what the
effect of the
christmas relaxation has been
not necessarily no we will we'll look at
the data
on the 16th of december and
we'll announce the results of that
review on the 17th of december
of course you've got to take into
account that christmas is coming up
but nevertheless with the case rates
coming down as they are as i said
coming down by almost a third in the
last week
um then we will be absolutely looking at
each area
and um seeing what is the right tier
for that area you know i want to see
areas that have
pulled together followed the rules got
the case rate down
like liverpool has over the last month
which has led to it having going into
tier two
i want to see that happening much more
broadly
there are some areas of the country that
i'm worried about
there are some parts of the country
small parts of the country where the
numbers are still
going up so we do have to be careful and
we have to be cautious
but um the first review will be on the
16th of december
we'll look at the whole of england at
that point
and then we'll continue to review
regularly after that
thanks very much next question is from
uh jim pickard
at the ft jim secretary of state
um you say today that there's nearly 16
000 people in hospital with
covet can you say what proportion of
those are in hospital
because of coverd as opposed to people
who are in hospital for other
underlying reasons such as cancer or
they've broken a leg and they happen to
have covert and that's been picked up
and also nadine zahawi the new vaccine
minister has suggested that
people who refuse to get vaccinated
could be not allowed to visit
restaurants bars cinemas and so on
is that kind of stick approach something
that you agree with
uh thanks very much well i'll ask steve
to answer the first one and then i'll
answer the second question
so the vast majority of people when we
have a pandemic and the infection rates
are high are in because of the direct
effects of covid
we do see people in hospital
with covid when infection rates are high
who have not
been admitted because of covered so as
the secondary state
highlighted about a third of people have
covered without any symptoms so we have
for some time in the nhs
been testing everybody who gets admitted
for covert
to pick up whether they have it or not
and of course as infection rates
increase in the community then the
chance of picking up asymptomatic
individuals as they come into hospital
uh increases so we certainly do see
cases of individuals who've come into
hospital without covid who then test
positive
and that's why we've got very detailed
infection prevention and control
measures in
we not only test people when they arrive
in hospital we test people after they've
been in
hospital for a few days because it is
also possible that when you arrive
uh you may test negative so we're very
uh
careful to ensure that we're testing
people on a regular basis in their in
their first week in hospital
because because that keeps patients safe
it keeps staff safe
but the important thing of course as i
always say is to get infection rates
down
uh because the lower the rate in the
community
uh the less the chance is that you will
be admitted into hospital for some other
condition
and turn out to test positive for covid
and on
on vaccines look our overall approach on
the vaccines is firstly that we do not
plan to mandate
the vaccine we think that by
encouraging the uptake of the vaccine we
will get a
very high proportion of people in this
country to
take up the vaccine because of course it
is it protects you but it also helps to
protect your
loved ones and your community on the
question of
what happens once you've had the vaccine
now of course in the first instance we
do not yet
have reliable data on whether a vaccine
not only protects you because
which we we do have a high degree of
confidence
uh subject to the mhra that i was um
talking about in my comments um we do
have a high degree of confidence that
the
three vaccines so far protect the
person who's been vaccinated but the
impact on whether you transmit
the virus is not as clear
from the data so far and therefore in
the first
instance our approach will be to watch
the indicators that we watch all of the
time the case rate the case rate amongst
the over 60s
and the positivity rate and
to see the impact of that on the
of the vaccine and the vaccine program
on the uh
uh on on on the pandemic now having said
that for
a long time now we've been looking at uh
the the questions that uh minister
zahawi was uh talking about
uh and the question of what's the impact
on the individual in terms of what they
can do
and i've talked about that at press
conferences like these
uh months and months ago um and so
that's what uh minister
zahawi was referring to um he is a great
appointment
and i think will bring a huge amount of
support and uh uh and scrutiny
to the rollout of the vaccine and i
think he's
going to do a brilliant job he's already
been working on the
on the vaccine on the the business
department side of the fence
and i'm really delighted that he's
joined the department today
next question is from kate pickles at
the daily mail
thank you we have heard concerns from
the faculty of public health about the
enormous resources required for mass
testing
and the suggestion that it could detract
from the vaccine programme
firstly i wondered how you'd respond to
that and how confident you are that the
two things can successfully run
alongside one another
secondly is the expansion of community
testing and admission that test and
trace hasn't worked
as well as you would have liked and how
can you envisage test and trace changing
as a result of this new program uh
thanks very much well
i can reassure you on both counts the
first thing is that
the community testing program is a big
expansion
of what we can do within nhs test and
trace
and it's only because of the work of nhs
test and trace over the last nine months
the the work of the team that has
got these massive new testing
capabilities that allow us to make these
expansions
so uh that work has been the work of nhs
test and trace has been absolutely
critical in getting us to this point
when we can roll out
such uh such widespread use of the
of the tests uh for instance today to
university
students and then as general messenger
was saying uh more broadly to the
community working with local directors
of public health
um on the um on the first
part of the question the key point is
that testing and
vaccination need to run alongside each
other and this has already been
happening
for instance in the vaccine trials we
also
tested repeatedly some of the peoples
with people within the trials
to find out if they picked up covert and
that's one of the ways that you can find
out if a vaccine can work
and especially because once you've taken
a vaccine
it still takes some time to
get immunity through the vaccine not
least because you have to have two doses
that it's critical that we have the
testing program running alongside the
vaccine program
and so they are designed to be symbiotic
i'll ask
general messenger to say a little bit
more about this but you know the last
thing i'll say on it
is this um the rollout that we can
announce today
of the community testing program is a
sign of the success of nhs test and
trace
in delivering the massive capability
that we now
have to be able to keep more people safe
and to find this virus and to get it
under control with the minimal negative
impact on people's lives
that all of these things have general
messenger
um well i i'm all of uh all of three
weeks in but
uh my experience thus far absolutely
supports what the secretary of state
says
the importance of alignment with what
test and trace have achieved so far
the vital nature of the alignment with
the vaccine
we're absolutely we have to ensure that
those are
synchronous and not competitive i can
tell you how supportive colleagues have
been in the vaccine task force and the
test and trace their experience their
skills
their knowledge has been vital as we've
uh as we've looked to build this
community
testing uh proposal so
to me that alignment is there but we're
absolutely
certain that we cannot allow uh each
other to disrupt or deflect from that
the important business
we're all doing thanks very much kate
the final question is from david hughes
at the pa david
as secretary of state tomorrow mps will
vote on these new tears arrangements
the impact assessment the government has
published today makes clear that without
restrictions
the nhs could be overwhelmed given that
are your colleagues on the tory benches
who are thinking of voting against these
measures acting irresponsibly
and for general messenger 23 million
people will be going into tier three
this week
uh what sort of proportion of those
people would you expect your community
testing
uh exercise to cover uh thanks very much
david well i would urge all mps
right across the house to vote for the
tiered system
the tiered system is uh has a lower set
of restrictions than the national
lockdown
in all three tiers but it's also more
targeted so that the areas where the
prevalence is
lower and the pressure on the nhs is
lower
have fewer restrictions which means that
people can
do more in terms of going about their
their their normal lives
and obviously has a less detrimental
impact on the economy unfortunately
though we do have to have
the higher tier restrictions and in
particular tier three restrictions in
place
so that we can have confidence that we
can keep getting
this virus down and then keep it under
control
right across the country and that way
it is the best way to avoid a third
lockdown
and it is the most proportionate way to
take the action that we need
to keep people safe and to stop the nhs
being overwhelmed so i hope that we get
a very significant proportion of mps
from all parties uh voting for the
proposals that were put before
tomorrow i don't know professor pass if
you've got anything to add from the nhs
side
and then i'll ask general messenger to
answer the second question no no simply
to reiterate the importance as the nhs
goes into its busiest time of year to
ensure
that infection rates are low and falling
because as sure as nightfall as day that
is
two weeks later unfortunately
more hospital admissions more people in
hospital
more pressure on nhs services and of
course
unfortunately more deaths and
increasingly as we understand conditions
such as long covered
more long-term health problems for
people so
the key as always is to get infection
rates down
and to ensure that they continue to stay
down
uh thanks very much uh general messenger
um
david i don't know how many of those 23
million will be able to to reach because
planning is still
uh very much uh underway and as i said
will uh the
the nature of this will vary uh from
region to region and from area to area
uh we we're alive to the the possibility
that we will not be able to do this all
at once um but we assess that
uh local authorities are at varying
levels of
of preparedness and readiness uh to
to do this and therefore i can see this
as an offer that will
sequence over time and into january
and beyond the priority that we accord
the levels of support we give will be
based on the infection rate
how long those areas have been under
harsh restrictions
how mature their plans are how ready
they are to deliver them
and that's the business of the next week
or so is to try and identify
uh some front runners uh and and to lean
into support of them so we can have a
quick
early impact but as i say i can see this
being sequenced over time
thanks very much the the only thing i'd
add to that is that i'd urge
all those council leaders director of
public health
and those in the devolved
administrations who want to
take up this offer that set out in the
prospectus
those within the tier three areas in
england and the da's
with whom we've been working to come
forward and come forward with their
proposals
often they know their communities best
and so we want to work
hand-in-glove with local directors of
public health with local authorities
and of course with colleagues and mps
who represent those
areas to make sure that we can use this
community testing program
as effectively as possible to root out
this virus
and also then hopefully to free up
people to be able to do some of the
things that we love and
and that way we can better get through
this together
thanks very much indeed that ends
today's coronavirus briefing from number
10 downing street
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news